manual.md, before:

# VLab4Mic: A virtual laboratory for Microscopy

# 1. Installation

VLab4Mic is compatible with **Python 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12** on macOS, Windows, and Linux.

> 💡 **We strongly recommend** creating a new virtual environment to use VLab4Mic.  
> You can use either Conda ([Miniconda installation](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)) or Python's built-in `venv` module.

## 🛠️ Step 1: Create a New Environment

You can use either Conda or Python's built-in `venv` module to create a new environment.

### 🐍 Using Conda

Run the following command (replace `myenv` with your desired environment name):

```bash
conda create --name myenv python=3.11
```

Then activate it:
```bash
conda activate myenv
```

### 🐍 Using venv (built-in Python module)

Run the following commands (replace `myenv` with your desired environment name):

```bash
python -m venv myenv
```

Activate the environment:

- On macOS/Linux:
    ```bash
    source myenv/bin/activate
    ```
- On Windows:
    ```bash
    myenv\Scripts\activate
    ```

## 📦 Step 2: Install VLab4Mic

Currently, VLab4Mic is available through Test PyPI (PyPI release coming soon!):

```bash
pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple vlab4mic
```

---

# 2. How to use VLab4Mic

VLab4Mic can be used as a Python library or through codeless Jupyter notebooks.  
For detailed usage examples, see our [example scripts](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/tree/main/examples).

## 2.1 🚀 Codeless Jupyter Notebooks

VLab4Mic codeless notebooks allow you to use its methods **without writing code**.

### 📚 Where to find and use VLab4Mic codeless notebooks

You can use a notebook on a local installation or on Google Colab.  
To use VLab4Mic in Colab, click on the "Open in Colab" badge and follow the instructions in the notebook.

| Category | Description | Notebook | Colab Link |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Main Interface** | Create virtual samples and simulate image acquisition with multiple imaging modalities | [![Jupyter Notebook](https://img.shields.io/badge/jupyter-blue.svg?style=flat&logo=jupyter&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_main.ipynb) | [![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://githubtocolab.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_main.ipynb) |
| **Parameter Sweeps** | Generate and analyze simulations over parameter ranges for optimization | [![Jupyter Notebook](https://img.shields.io/badge/jupyter-blue.svg?style=flat&logo=jupyter&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_parameter_sweeps.ipynb) | [![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://githubtocolab.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_parameter_sweeps.ipynb) |

### 🖥️ Use codeless notebooks on a local installation

To use a notebook locally, you need to install VLab4Mic as detailed above.

#### 1️⃣ Activate your environment

```bash
conda activate myenv  # Replace myenv with your environment name
```

#### 2️⃣ Launch Jupyter Lab

```bash
jupyter lab
```
This will open Jupyter Lab in your web browser.

#### 3️⃣ Download and Open Notebooks

Download the notebooks from our [repository here](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/tree/main/notebooks), or refer to the table above.  
Once downloaded, use the Jupyter Lab interface to find and open the notebook.

#### 4️⃣ Start Experimenting!

Follow the interactive widgets and instructions in each notebook.  
For questions, refer to our [documentation](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/wiki) or [create an issue](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/issues).

---

## 2.2 🐍 Using VLab4Mic as a Python Library

When using VLab4Mic as a Python library, you can parameterize your experiment or parameter sweep through its high-level functions.  
These functions are covered in detail in the Methods section.

Activate your Python environment as above.

Access VLab4Mic main methods such as `image_vsample` as follows:

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

image_outputs, image_noiseless_outputs, experiment = image_vsample()
```

Get a description of the available parameters of each method by using Python's built-in `help()`:

```python
help(image_vsample)
```

---

# 3. VLab4Mic Methods

VLab4Mic main functionality can be accessed with two main methods:
- 🧬 **Create and simulate imaging of a virtual sample**
- 🔬 **Set up and run parameter sweep**

## 3.1 🧬 Create and image a virtual sample

VLab4Mic allows you to create a virtual sample and generate imaging simulations of it on one or many modalities.

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

image_outputs, image_noiseless_outputs, experiment = image_vsample()
```

The example above creates a default virtual sample and returns imaging simulations with and without noise.  
The `image_vsample` method also returns an experiment object containing all modules used to generate the simulations.

### ⚙️ Parameterize your virtual sample and imaging

The `image_vsample` method allows you to specify each step of the virtual sample, such as:
- Structure of interest
- Type of probe (e.g. Antibody, Linker, GFP, ...)
- Target site on the structure (epitope sequence or residues)
- Labelling efficiency of probe
- Distance of probe to epitope
- Number of labelled particles
- Sample dimensions
- ...and more

Example:

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

modalities = ["Widefield", "Confocal", "AiryScan", "STED", "SMLM"]

images, noiseless, experiment = image_vsample(
    structure="7R5K",  # PDB ID code for a Nuclear Pore complex
    probe_template="Antibody",  # Probe template for an antibody
    probe_target_type="Sequence",  
    probe_target_value="ELAVGSL",  # epitope sequence
    number_of_particles=10,
    random_rotations=True,
    rotation_angles=None,
    multimodal=modalities,
    STED={"exp_time": 0.01},  # modality-specific parameters
    run_simulation=True,
    clear_experiment=True,
)
```

> 📖 Find a complete and detailed list of parameters in the documentation of the method, or refer to the parameter tables section.

We also provide probe templates tailored for specific structures, such as:

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

images, noiseless, experiment = image_vsample(
    structure="7R5K",  # PDB ID code for a Nuclear Pore complex
    probe_templates=["NPC_Nup96_Cterminal_direct",],  # Pre-set probe for 7R5K
    run_simulation=True,
    clear_experiment=True,
)
```

A table of these and other templates can be found in the Templates section.

To display the results:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
nmods = len(modalities)
fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, nmods)
nframe = 0
for i, mod in enumerate(modalities):
    axs[i].imshow(images[mod][nframe], cmap="magma")
    axs[i].set_title(mod)
```

---

## 3.2 🔬 Run a parameter sweep analysis

VLab4Mic allows you to test parameter combinations for sample and image simulations.

The main method to run a parameter sweep is `run_parameter_sweep`:

```python
from vlab4mic.sweep_generator import run_parameter_sweep

sweep_gen = run_parameter_sweep(
    # output and analysis
    output_name="vlab_script",
    return_generator=True,
    save_sweep_images=True,
    save_analysis_results=True,
    run_analysis=True
)
```

This generates and saves a default parameter sweep. The `sweep_gen` object contains all parameters used to set and run the sweep.

### 🎚️ Specify values for each parameter

You can parameterize the sweep by specifying the values or ranges to use for each parameter.  
Pass a list of values or a tuple with (min, max, nsteps) to generate linearly spaced values.

Example:

```python
from vlab4mic.sweep_generator import run_parameter_sweep

sweep_gen = run_parameter_sweep(
    structures=["7R5K",],
    probe_templates=["NPC_Nup96_Cterminal_direct",],  # Probe template tailored to 7R5K
    sweep_repetitions=20,
    # parameters for sweep
    labelling_efficiency=(0, 1, 5),  # 5 linearly spaced values between 0 and 1
    defect=(0, 1, 5),  # 5 linearly spaced values between 0 and 1
    defect_small_cluster=[300,],  # 1 single value 
    defect_large_cluster=[600,],  # 1 single value 
    exp_time=[0.001, 0.01,],  # 2 values
    # output and analysis
    output_name="vlab_script",
    return_generator=True,
    save_sweep_images=True,  # By default, the saving directory is set to the home path of the user
    save_analysis_results=True,
    run_analysis=True
)
```

> ⚠️ **Note:** When running a parameter sweep, all possible parameter combinations will be used.  
> For example, setting 10 values for labelling efficiencies and 10 values for particle defects will generate 100 combinations.

### 📝 Available parameters for sweeping

Each parameter in the following list is available for sweep (one or more values passed).  
If a parameter is `None`, it will not be swept and will use default values.

- probe_target_type
- probe_target_value
- probe_target_option
- probe_model
- probe_fluorophore
- probe_paratope
- probe_conjugation_target_info
- probe_seconday_epitope
- peptide_motif
- probe_distance_to_epitope
- probe_steric_hindrance
- probe_conjugation_efficiency
- probe_wobble_theta
- labelling_efficiency
- defect
- defect_small_cluster
- defect_large_cluster
- sample_dimensions
- particle_orientations
- rotation_angles
- minimal_distance
- pixelsize_nm
- lateral_resolution_nm
- axial_resolution_nm
- psf_voxel_nm
- depth_of_field_nm
- exp_time

---

# 4. 📋 Parameter tables

## 🏗️ Structure parameters

| Parameter name | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **structure** | 4-letter ID for a structural model from PDB database, or path to a structure file |  |  

## 🧪 Probe parameters

| Parameter name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| **probe_template** | Name of a pre-set probe configuration file (filename) |
| **probe_name** | Optional. Alternative name to identify this probe |
| **labelling_efficiency** | Efficiency of probe labelling (probability of probe to bind a given epitope). Float, default 1.0 |
| **probe_target_type** | Type of target: "Sequence", "Residue", or "Primary" |
| **probe_target_value** | Specific value depending on the target type (e.g., sequence string, residue info, etc.) |
| **probe_target_option** | Additional option for the probe target, used for secondary epitopes |
| **probe_distance_to_epitope** | Distance from the probe to the epitope (float, minimal distance set from epitope and probe paratope) |
| **probe_model** | 4-letter code for an atomic model on which to base this probe |
| **probe_fluorophore** | Fluorophore name for emitters (e.g., "AF647") |
| **probe_paratope** | If probe_model is defined, the paratope defines the anchor point of the probe |
| **probe_conjugation_target_info** | If probe_model is defined, this dictionary specifies the sites to use as probe emitters |
| **probe_conjugation_efficiency** | Efficiency of conjugation of emitters (float) |
| **probe_seconday_epitope** | If probe is secondary, this amino acid sequence defines the epitope on the primary antibody model |
| **probe_wobble_theta** | Enable probe wobbling (float or None) |
| **probe_steric_hindrance** | Steric hindrance value or configuration (distance between epitopes) |
| **peptide_motif** | Dictionary specifying motif extraction for probe target sequence |
| **as_primary** | Whether to treat the probe as a primary linker (bool) |

## 🧩 Defects parameters

| Parameter name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| **defect** | Fraction of the particle rendered inaccessible to probes (float) |
| **defect_small_cluster** | Maximum distance between epitopes for first grouping (in Å) |
| **defect_large_cluster** | Minimum distance between epitopes for second grouping (in Å) |

## 🧱 Virtual sample parameters

| Parameter name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| **virtual_sample_template** | Name of the configuration file for the virtual sample template |
| **sample_dimensions** | In nanometers, define the X, Y, and Z sizes of the field (list of float) |
| **number_of_particles** | Number of independent copies of a particle to create and distribute (int) |
| **particle_positions** | List of relative positions of particles in the field (list of np.array or list) |
| **random_orientations** | If True, each particle will be randomly assigned a new orientation (bool, default False) |
| **xy_orientations** | List of orientation directions on the xy plane to choose from |
| **xz_orientations** | List of orientation directions on the xz plane to choose from |
| **yz_orientations** | List of orientation directions on the yz plane to choose from |
| **axial_offset** | List of Z positions to choose from as offsets from the focus plane |
| **random_placing** | Define if position in field is random or the center of field (bool, default False) |
| **random_rotations** | If True, apply random rotations to particles (bool, default False) |
| **rotation_angles** | List of rotation angles to choose from |
| **minimal_distance** | Minimal allowed distance between particles (float) |

## 🔬 Modalities parameters

| Parameter name | Description | 
| --- | --- | 
| **pixelsize_nm** | Pixel size of image in nanometers (float or int) |
| **lateral_resolution_nm** | Lateral resolution in nanometers (float or int) |
| **axial_resolution_nm** | Axial resolution in nanometers (float or int) |
| **psf_voxel_nm** | Voxel size used to render the PSF in nanometers (float or int, defaults to 10 nm) |
| **depth_of_field_nm** | Depth of field in nanometers (float or int) |

## 📸 Acquisition parameters

| Parameter name | Description | 
| --- | --- | 
| **exp_time** | Exposure time in seconds (float) |
| **noise** | Whether to use noise at detection or not (bool) |
| **nframes** | Number of frames (int) |

---

# 5. 🗂️ Templates

## 🏗️ Structures

Any atomic structure in PDB/CIF format can be used in VLab4Mic.  
Below are example structures readily available for codeless notebooks and for which example probes exist.

| Structure id | Description | Database | Format used |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1XI5 | Clathrin D6 coat with auxilin J-domain | RCSB | CIF format |
| 7R5K | Human nuclear pore complex (constricted) | RCSB | CIF format |
| 3J3Y | Atomic-level structure of the entire HIV-1 capsid (186 hexamers + 12 pentamers) | RCSB | CIF format |
| 8GMO | Bacteriophage T4 capsid shell  | RCSB | CIF format |

## 🧪 Probes

Each probe is a configuration file whose parameterization models a particular type of labelling.  
For instance, NHS_ester models a direct label that targets lysine residues on any atomic model.  
Indirect probes include an atomic model for the probe itself, as is the case for GFP or an Antibody.

### Structure-independent probes

| Probe name | Description | Targets | Probe Model | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **NHS_ester** | Direct label for Lysine residues | Residues: LYS | NA | The location of each lysine is used as position for emitters |
| **Linker** | Indirect label modelled as a rigid spacer that binds to the epitope | NA | NA | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **Antibody** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of IGG antibody against HIV-1 isolates | NA | 1HZH | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **Nanobody** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of a synthetic nanobody | NA | 7MFV | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **GFP** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of GFP | NA | 6YLQ | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **GFP_w_nanobody** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of a nanobody in complex with eGFP | NA | 6XZF | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **mMaple** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of the fluorescent protein mTFP1 | NA | 2HQK | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **SNAP-tag** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of SNAP-tag with labelled with a fluorophore | NA | 6Y8P | Requires specification of target type and values |

### Structure-specific probes

| Probe name | Description | Targets | Probe Model | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **CCP_heavy_chain_Cterminal** | Direct probe for C terminal site of Heavy Chain of Clathrin Coated Pit | Sequence: EQATETQ | NA | Based on model 1XI5 |
| **NPC_Nup96_Cterminal_direct** | Direct probe C terminal site of Nup96 in Nuclear Pore Complex | Sequence: ELAVGSL | NA | Based on model 7R5K |
| **HIV_capsid_p24_direct** | Direct probe for HIV-1 Capsid monomer (p24) | Sequence: SPRTLNA | NA | Based on model 3J3Y |
| **anti-p24_primary_antibody_HIV** | Antibody for HIV-1 Capsid monomer (p24) | Sequence: SPRTLNA | 1HZH | Based on model 3J3Y |

## 🧱 Virtual sample

| Virtual sample name | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **square1x1um_randomised** | Virtual sample of square dimensions and a single particle placed in the center |  |

## 🔬 Modalities

| Modality name | Description | PSF shape X,Y,Z (nm) | Image pixelsize (nm) | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Widefield** | Widefield microscope | 94,94,331 | 100 | |
| **Confocal** | Confocal microscope | 94,94,331 | 70 | |
| **STED** | STED microscope | 20,20,20 | 15 | |
| **SMLM** | SMLM image model | 8,8,8 | 5 | Emulates effective image |
| **Reference** | Idealised microscope | 5,5,5 | 5 | |

Commit message:

manual: include instruction to install vlab and jupyter

manual.md, after:

# VLab4Mic: A virtual laboratory for Microscopy

# 1. Installation

VLab4Mic is compatible with **Python 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, and 3.12** on macOS, Windows, and Linux.

> 💡 **We strongly recommend** creating a new virtual environment to use VLab4Mic.  
> You can use either Conda ([Miniconda installation](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)) or Python's built-in `venv` module.

## 🛠️ Step 1: Create a New Environment

You can use either Conda or Python's built-in `venv` module to create a new environment.

### 🐍 Using Conda

Run the following command (replace `myenv` with your desired environment name):

```bash
conda create --name myenv python=3.11
```

Then activate it:
```bash
conda activate myenv
```

### 🐍 Using venv (built-in Python module)

Run the following commands (replace `myenv` with your desired environment name):

```bash
python -m venv myenv
```

Activate the environment:

- On macOS/Linux:
    ```bash
    source myenv/bin/activate
    ```
- On Windows:
    ```bash
    myenv\Scripts\activate
    ```

## 📦 Step 2: Install VLab4Mic

Currently, VLab4Mic is available through Test PyPI (PyPI release coming soon!):

```bash
pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple vlab4mic
```

You can install vlab4mic with the necesary libraries to support our Jupyter notebooks:

```bash
pip install --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ --extra-index-url https://pypi.org/simple "vlab4mic[jupyter]"
```

---

# 2. How to use VLab4Mic

VLab4Mic can be used as a Python library or through codeless Jupyter notebooks.  
For detailed usage examples, see our [example scripts](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/tree/main/examples).

## 2.1 🚀 Codeless Jupyter Notebooks

VLab4Mic codeless notebooks allow you to use its methods **without writing code**.

### 📚 Where to find and use VLab4Mic codeless notebooks

You can use a notebook on a local installation or on Google Colab.  
To use VLab4Mic in Colab, click on the "Open in Colab" badge and follow the instructions in the notebook.

| Category | Description | Notebook | Colab Link |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Main Interface** | Create virtual samples and simulate image acquisition with multiple imaging modalities | [![Jupyter Notebook](https://img.shields.io/badge/jupyter-blue.svg?style=flat&logo=jupyter&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_main.ipynb) | [![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://githubtocolab.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_main.ipynb) |
| **Parameter Sweeps** | Generate and analyze simulations over parameter ranges for optimization | [![Jupyter Notebook](https://img.shields.io/badge/jupyter-blue.svg?style=flat&logo=jupyter&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_parameter_sweeps.ipynb) | [![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://githubtocolab.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/blob/main/notebooks/VLab4Mic_parameter_sweeps.ipynb) |

### 🖥️ Use codeless notebooks on a local installation

To use a notebook locally, you need to install VLab4Mic as detailed above.

#### 1️⃣ Activate your environment

```bash
conda activate myenv  # Replace myenv with your environment name
```

#### 2️⃣ Launch Jupyter Lab

```bash
jupyter lab
```
This will open Jupyter Lab in your web browser.

#### 3️⃣ Download and Open Notebooks

Download the notebooks from our [repository here](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/tree/main/notebooks), or refer to the table above.  
Once downloaded, use the Jupyter Lab interface to find and open the notebook.

#### 4️⃣ Start Experimenting!

Follow the interactive widgets and instructions in each notebook.  
For questions, refer to our [documentation](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/wiki) or [create an issue](https://github.com/HenriquesLab/SupraMolecularSimulator/issues).

---

## 2.2 🐍 Using VLab4Mic as a Python Library

When using VLab4Mic as a Python library, you can parameterize your experiment or parameter sweep through its high-level functions.  
These functions are covered in detail in the Methods section.

Activate your Python environment as above.

Access VLab4Mic main methods such as `image_vsample` as follows:

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

image_outputs, image_noiseless_outputs, experiment = image_vsample()
```

Get a description of the available parameters of each method by using Python's built-in `help()`:

```python
help(image_vsample)
```

---

# 3. VLab4Mic Methods

VLab4Mic main functionality can be accessed with two main methods:
- 🧬 **Create and simulate imaging of a virtual sample**
- 🔬 **Set up and run parameter sweep**

## 3.1 🧬 Create and image a virtual sample

VLab4Mic allows you to create a virtual sample and generate imaging simulations of it on one or many modalities.

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

image_outputs, image_noiseless_outputs, experiment = image_vsample()
```

The example above creates a default virtual sample and returns imaging simulations with and without noise.  
The `image_vsample` method also returns an experiment object containing all modules used to generate the simulations.

### ⚙️ Parameterize your virtual sample and imaging

The `image_vsample` method allows you to specify each step of the virtual sample, such as:
- Structure of interest
- Type of probe (e.g. Antibody, Linker, GFP, ...)
- Target site on the structure (epitope sequence or residues)
- Labelling efficiency of probe
- Distance of probe to epitope
- Number of labelled particles
- Sample dimensions
- ...and more

Example:

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

modalities = ["Widefield", "Confocal", "AiryScan", "STED", "SMLM"]

images, noiseless, experiment = image_vsample(
    structure="7R5K",  # PDB ID code for a Nuclear Pore complex
    probe_template="Antibody",  # Probe template for an antibody
    probe_target_type="Sequence",  
    probe_target_value="ELAVGSL",  # epitope sequence
    number_of_particles=10,
    random_rotations=True,
    rotation_angles=None,
    multimodal=modalities,
    STED={"exp_time": 0.01},  # modality-specific parameters
    run_simulation=True,
    clear_experiment=True,
)
```

> 📖 Find a complete and detailed list of parameters in the documentation of the method, or refer to the parameter tables section.

We also provide probe templates tailored for specific structures, such as:

```python
from vlab4mic.experiments import image_vsample

images, noiseless, experiment = image_vsample(
    structure="7R5K",  # PDB ID code for a Nuclear Pore complex
    probe_templates=["NPC_Nup96_Cterminal_direct",],  # Pre-set probe for 7R5K
    run_simulation=True,
    clear_experiment=True,
)
```

A table of these and other templates can be found in the Templates section.

To display the results:

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
nmods = len(modalities)
fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, nmods)
nframe = 0
for i, mod in enumerate(modalities):
    axs[i].imshow(images[mod][nframe], cmap="magma")
    axs[i].set_title(mod)
```

---

## 3.2 🔬 Run a parameter sweep analysis

VLab4Mic allows you to test parameter combinations for sample and image simulations.

The main method to run a parameter sweep is `run_parameter_sweep`:

```python
from vlab4mic.sweep_generator import run_parameter_sweep

sweep_gen = run_parameter_sweep(
    # output and analysis
    output_name="vlab_script",
    return_generator=True,
    save_sweep_images=True,
    save_analysis_results=True,
    run_analysis=True
)
```

This generates and saves a default parameter sweep. The `sweep_gen` object contains all parameters used to set and run the sweep.

### 🎚️ Specify values for each parameter

You can parameterize the sweep by specifying the values or ranges to use for each parameter.  
Pass a list of values or a tuple with (min, max, nsteps) to generate linearly spaced values.

Example:

```python
from vlab4mic.sweep_generator import run_parameter_sweep

sweep_gen = run_parameter_sweep(
    structures=["7R5K",],
    probe_templates=["NPC_Nup96_Cterminal_direct",],  # Probe template tailored to 7R5K
    sweep_repetitions=20,
    # parameters for sweep
    labelling_efficiency=(0, 1, 5),  # 5 linearly spaced values between 0 and 1
    defect=(0, 1, 5),  # 5 linearly spaced values between 0 and 1
    defect_small_cluster=[300,],  # 1 single value 
    defect_large_cluster=[600,],  # 1 single value 
    exp_time=[0.001, 0.01,],  # 2 values
    # output and analysis
    output_name="vlab_script",
    return_generator=True,
    save_sweep_images=True,  # By default, the saving directory is set to the home path of the user
    save_analysis_results=True,
    run_analysis=True
)
```

> ⚠️ **Note:** When running a parameter sweep, all possible parameter combinations will be used.  
> For example, setting 10 values for labelling efficiencies and 10 values for particle defects will generate 100 combinations.

### 📝 Available parameters for sweeping

Each parameter in the following list is available for sweep (one or more values passed).  
If a parameter is `None`, it will not be swept and will use default values.

- probe_target_type
- probe_target_value
- probe_target_option
- probe_model
- probe_fluorophore
- probe_paratope
- probe_conjugation_target_info
- probe_seconday_epitope
- peptide_motif
- probe_distance_to_epitope
- probe_steric_hindrance
- probe_conjugation_efficiency
- probe_wobble_theta
- labelling_efficiency
- defect
- defect_small_cluster
- defect_large_cluster
- sample_dimensions
- particle_orientations
- rotation_angles
- minimal_distance
- pixelsize_nm
- lateral_resolution_nm
- axial_resolution_nm
- psf_voxel_nm
- depth_of_field_nm
- exp_time

---

# 4. 📋 Parameter tables

## 🏗️ Structure parameters

| Parameter name | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **structure** | 4-letter ID for a structural model from PDB database, or path to a structure file |  |  

## 🧪 Probe parameters

| Parameter name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| **probe_template** | Name of a pre-set probe configuration file (filename) |
| **probe_name** | Optional. Alternative name to identify this probe |
| **labelling_efficiency** | Efficiency of probe labelling (probability of probe to bind a given epitope). Float, default 1.0 |
| **probe_target_type** | Type of target: "Sequence", "Residue", or "Primary" |
| **probe_target_value** | Specific value depending on the target type (e.g., sequence string, residue info, etc.) |
| **probe_target_option** | Additional option for the probe target, used for secondary epitopes |
| **probe_distance_to_epitope** | Distance from the probe to the epitope (float, minimal distance set from epitope and probe paratope) |
| **probe_model** | 4-letter code for an atomic model on which to base this probe |
| **probe_fluorophore** | Fluorophore name for emitters (e.g., "AF647") |
| **probe_paratope** | If probe_model is defined, the paratope defines the anchor point of the probe |
| **probe_conjugation_target_info** | If probe_model is defined, this dictionary specifies the sites to use as probe emitters |
| **probe_conjugation_efficiency** | Efficiency of conjugation of emitters (float) |
| **probe_seconday_epitope** | If probe is secondary, this amino acid sequence defines the epitope on the primary antibody model |
| **probe_wobble_theta** | Enable probe wobbling (float or None) |
| **probe_steric_hindrance** | Steric hindrance value or configuration (distance between epitopes) |
| **peptide_motif** | Dictionary specifying motif extraction for probe target sequence |
| **as_primary** | Whether to treat the probe as a primary linker (bool) |

## 🧩 Defects parameters

| Parameter name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| **defect** | Fraction of the particle rendered inaccessible to probes (float) |
| **defect_small_cluster** | Maximum distance between epitopes for first grouping (in Å) |
| **defect_large_cluster** | Minimum distance between epitopes for second grouping (in Å) |

## 🧱 Virtual sample parameters

| Parameter name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| **virtual_sample_template** | Name of the configuration file for the virtual sample template |
| **sample_dimensions** | In nanometers, define the X, Y, and Z sizes of the field (list of float) |
| **number_of_particles** | Number of independent copies of a particle to create and distribute (int) |
| **particle_positions** | List of relative positions of particles in the field (list of np.array or list) |
| **random_orientations** | If True, each particle will be randomly assigned a new orientation (bool, default False) |
| **xy_orientations** | List of orientation directions on the xy plane to choose from |
| **xz_orientations** | List of orientation directions on the xz plane to choose from |
| **yz_orientations** | List of orientation directions on the yz plane to choose from |
| **axial_offset** | List of Z positions to choose from as offsets from the focus plane |
| **random_placing** | Define if position in field is random or the center of field (bool, default False) |
| **random_rotations** | If True, apply random rotations to particles (bool, default False) |
| **rotation_angles** | List of rotation angles to choose from |
| **minimal_distance** | Minimal allowed distance between particles (float) |

## 🔬 Modalities parameters

| Parameter name | Description | 
| --- | --- | 
| **pixelsize_nm** | Pixel size of image in nanometers (float or int) |
| **lateral_resolution_nm** | Lateral resolution in nanometers (float or int) |
| **axial_resolution_nm** | Axial resolution in nanometers (float or int) |
| **psf_voxel_nm** | Voxel size used to render the PSF in nanometers (float or int, defaults to 10 nm) |
| **depth_of_field_nm** | Depth of field in nanometers (float or int) |

## 📸 Acquisition parameters

| Parameter name | Description | 
| --- | --- | 
| **exp_time** | Exposure time in seconds (float) |
| **noise** | Whether to use noise at detection or not (bool) |
| **nframes** | Number of frames (int) |

---

# 5. 🗂️ Templates

## 🏗️ Structures

Any atomic structure in PDB/CIF format can be used in VLab4Mic.  
Below are example structures readily available for codeless notebooks and for which example probes exist.

| Structure id | Description | Database | Format used |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1XI5 | Clathrin D6 coat with auxilin J-domain | RCSB | CIF format |
| 7R5K | Human nuclear pore complex (constricted) | RCSB | CIF format |
| 3J3Y | Atomic-level structure of the entire HIV-1 capsid (186 hexamers + 12 pentamers) | RCSB | CIF format |
| 8GMO | Bacteriophage T4 capsid shell  | RCSB | CIF format |

## 🧪 Probes

Each probe is a configuration file whose parameterization models a particular type of labelling.  
For instance, NHS_ester models a direct label that targets lysine residues on any atomic model.  
Indirect probes include an atomic model for the probe itself, as is the case for GFP or an Antibody.

### Structure-independent probes

| Probe name | Description | Targets | Probe Model | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **NHS_ester** | Direct label for Lysine residues | Residues: LYS | NA | The location of each lysine is used as position for emitters |
| **Linker** | Indirect label modelled as a rigid spacer that binds to the epitope | NA | NA | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **Antibody** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of IGG antibody against HIV-1 isolates | NA | 1HZH | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **Nanobody** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of a synthetic nanobody | NA | 7MFV | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **GFP** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of GFP | NA | 6YLQ | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **GFP_w_nanobody** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of a nanobody in complex with eGFP | NA | 6XZF | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **mMaple** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of the fluorescent protein mTFP1 | NA | 2HQK | Requires specification of target type and values |
| **SNAP-tag** | Indirect label based on the crystallographic structure of SNAP-tag with labelled with a fluorophore | NA | 6Y8P | Requires specification of target type and values |

### Structure-specific probes

| Probe name | Description | Targets | Probe Model | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **CCP_heavy_chain_Cterminal** | Direct probe for C terminal site of Heavy Chain of Clathrin Coated Pit | Sequence: EQATETQ | NA | Based on model 1XI5 |
| **NPC_Nup96_Cterminal_direct** | Direct probe C terminal site of Nup96 in Nuclear Pore Complex | Sequence: ELAVGSL | NA | Based on model 7R5K |
| **HIV_capsid_p24_direct** | Direct probe for HIV-1 Capsid monomer (p24) | Sequence: SPRTLNA | NA | Based on model 3J3Y |
| **anti-p24_primary_antibody_HIV** | Antibody for HIV-1 Capsid monomer (p24) | Sequence: SPRTLNA | 1HZH | Based on model 3J3Y |

## 🧱 Virtual sample

| Virtual sample name | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **square1x1um_randomised** | Virtual sample of square dimensions and a single particle placed in the center |  |

## 🔬 Modalities

| Modality name | Description | PSF shape X,Y,Z (nm) | Image pixelsize (nm) | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Widefield** | Widefield microscope | 94,94,331 | 100 | |
| **Confocal** | Confocal microscope | 94,94,331 | 70 | |
| **STED** | STED microscope | 20,20,20 | 15 | |
| **SMLM** | SMLM image model | 8,8,8 | 5 | Emulates effective image |
| **Reference** | Idealised microscope | 5,5,5 | 5 | |
